About Skills
By Dmitry Tokarev

When we are born we are not really able to do anything other than control our limbs in a general way. As we grow up we learn to control our movement, we learn to speak(by listening to other people), and start to understand the world around us. Toddlers cannot be 'taught' to walk. They must simple stand and try to learn it themselves through trial and error. They learn to control their limbs to balance their bodies while standing up. Obviously the parents must assist the child by helping them by holding them up, giving them guidance and helping them balance. Once they have learned to do that, then they have obtained the skill of "walking". 

As we grow up we obtain other skills in a similar manner, we learn to speak, run, read and write, cook food, do basic chores and so on. These skills often build on each other. One will have a difficult time learning to run if they cannot walk, and they will have a difficult time walking competently if they cannot stand. It will be difficult to learn to write if you cannot read. 

When we go through school, we learn less and less skills, and more and more facts. We learn the basic rules of mathematics such as numbers, addition, subtraction and so on. But counting is hardly a skill as it does not result in any physical manifestation. We can use counting to barter and trade goods in a fair manner. If an orange is worth 2 apples, you would not want to trade your 2 oranges for 3 apples in a fair exchange. Kids may get some money from their parents they can exchange for goods at convience stores like snacks. 

Eventually we learn completely abstract facts and ideas that most of us will never find a use for. They may assist us in our understanding of the world and can allow us to form models and create theories that can then predict future events. But this is very rarely used unless you become an expert in that field. Does knowing that the mitrochondria is the powerhouse of the cell and produces ATP through the citric acid cycle help you in any way in life? Unless you are trying to understand animal metabolism and energy production because you are training sports or working on some kind of medicine this information is going to be useless for you. 

There are some general facts we learn that can become useful for us. Learning about chemistry we learn the chemical reaction 2NH3 + 2NaOCl -> 2NaONH3 + Cl2 which is often just reiterated to people as "Don't mix bleach and ammonium." since it produces chlorine gas which is toxic. 

But these are the exception, and unless you work in that field specifically almost all of the information you learned about it will be forgotten over years since it will never be used.

The current education system therefore is mostly about filling your head with trivial information that you will never need to recall ever again after you took the test to see if you could memorize it. 

This leaves us graduated from school with almost no skills and unable to do anything. We do not learn how to cook food, we do not learn how to grow food, we do not learn how to fix things, we do not learn how to even even pay taxes if we can find a job.

It is up to us as individuals to learn the skills necessary to live life. We have to learn how to cook by ourselves using recipes and today we can use youtube to accelerate our skill development. 

Acquiring skills is very simple in actuality. If you want to develop the skill of say creating metal tools you must learn how to obtain the raw materials, process them, and manipulate them. You must have an idea of the tool you want to build to start out of course.

So if you feel like you have no skills or are unable to do anything you must first come up with an attainable goal. And then obtain each goal with effort that we have put in.

Creating a new processor that competes against Intel or AMD, or even creating an electric car is far beyond the capabilities of a single individual. If you want to create something large you must understand this is done as a large group with a collective of other people that have complimentary skills. You must find the part that you are good at or would enjoy doing the most and focus your goals in that area.

Often times someone has already done what you are trying to learn to do, and it would be prudent to learn about how they did it to guide your journey to save some time and resources. Doing something the first time is always the hardest and most expensive. After that you know what mistakes to avoid and what to do to get the job done. 

Large projects also require a breadth of different skills. You may be good at one thing, but in order to do something productive for yourself you must combine different skills together. 

Modern society and economies also prefers people who are extreme experts in 1 area, and they hire multiple experts in each field who come together to produce something of value. But if every other situation it is preferable to have people who have a breadth of skills but are not necessary experts in any 1 field. Unforuntaly these days it is hard to find a niche to make a living for yourself when you have a breadth of skills but are not an expert in anything since most of those niches have been filled, exported or automated in the modern economy. 

Becoming an expert in a field comes down to the amount of work and time you have invested in that field. 10000 hours is a common standard thrown around, but in reality if done with focused productive work you can cut that number down to something like 2000. At 40 hours a week of focused productive work using all the resources you have, you can become an expert in most things in 1 year.

